
welcome back to my hotel room and
therefore this type of conversational
content where basically I'm just being
interviewed by Steph we've also got
Derek here so you may remember Derek
from previous video Derek's one of our
coaches that I can study as well he's a
current medical student in Australia
went through the IB program and he's got
you know a lot of his own experience
with coaching as well as with his own
academic life and stuff that can bring
to the table so all right we're talking
about productivity today what about
productivity are we talking about Steph
right so I think honestly speaking to a
lot of people what you are able to
achieve is absolutely insane so maybe
you'd like to share a bit on how you're
able to get so much done in one day yeah
so that's quite interesting okay there's
a few things here so I think people will
probably be quite surprised to know that
my days do not look very that they don't
look that intense I think people
probably imagine that every minute of my
time is full of something and it's
scheduled with some kind of activity and
I'm like always you know doing something
that's super high yield all the time and
it's just simply not true like my daily
life is probably less busy than most
average people just going through you
know average life like I recently
finished like a whole season of the boys
I've recently discovered that Disney
plus started uh released a season three
of Daredevil which I was like really
annoyed that you know Netflix canceled
it because it was like my favorite
series and then I'm still kind of pissed
off that they canceled the Punisher and
apparently Disney plus is bringing that
back so I'm really looking forward to
that and then in Final Fantasy 7 remake
came out I like blocked out a whole week
of my life just to lock myself in a room
and play that and you can bet I'm gonna
do that when episode 2 comes out as well
so I spend a lot of my time doing a lot
of just random things that like normal
human beings do and I think that's part
of kind of the mindset is that being
productive is very different from being
busy yes I have busy days like I'm
traveling at the moment when I'm
traveling I tend to be very busy because
like I'm only here for a short period of
time uh and therefore I want you know as
much kind of you know like stuff in that
time packed as possible so I pack my
schedule a little bit more hey we got uh
Lewis that's joining as well Lewis is
another one of our coaches I don't think
Lewis has been in any of our videos
before but um you know this is Louis and
he's a student in Brisbane uni student
in Brisbane so there's a difference
between being productive and then being
busy and when I'm busy yes I'm very busy
like I you know last week I worked like
you know 22 hours and like non-stop I I
didn't have time to eat I didn't have
time I didn't even get up out of my seat
I didn't go to the toilet so there are
times where I'm definitely very busy but
most days 95 of my days I'm just doing
my eight to you know whatever eight to
ten hours of work or whatever it is you
know spread across there some days I'm
doing four to six hours of work some
days that's it you know I take a day off
my life is generally fairly relaxed but
the key is that when I am spending my
time doing something and making sure
that I'm very focused and I'm making
sure that I'm getting very high quality
deep work out of it just like with
something like studying if you're
learning something incorrectly or you're
learning something to a bad quality and
therefore you're not getting the
retention or the retrieval level that
you need you then need to reinvest time
later to fix that you know to relearn it
or to get to a higher level however uh
if you do it properly you can save some
of that time so the same principle is
the case for something like productivity
as well is that when you're doing work
you will waste a lot of time and I
didn't realize this for actually a
number of years like when I was first
starting my first business and like I
was just smashing those hundred hour
weeks my quality of work was dropping
and I was spending a lot of time on just
fixing errors and like redoing things
and you know not really being in flow
and not switching between things so
quickly that I was losing focus and
attention and things like that so when
I'm doing something I'm very very
focused that's that's the key and I
train myself to be able to do deep good
quality work when I am doing it and the
second thing is that I make sure that
when I spend my time doing a task that
is the task that is going to provide me
the most amount of possible benefit and
I assist that based on a few different
criteria number one is if I don't do
this task what is the consequence of it
and is that a consequence I can accept
or not are you guys all familiar with
this right because it's in the course
but you know the idea that you should
face the importance thing not based on
how you feel about it which is critical
which is critical right you shouldn't
base something based on how you feel
about it but you should face the
importance of something based on what is
the consequence if you don't do it and
can you accept or manage that so
something like for example like homework
is the common example I give for
students right is yes you may feel that
homework is important but maybe you feel
that homework is important because
you're being brainwashed to respect
figures of authority and that your sense
of internal validation is dictated by
whether your teacher tells you off or
not no maybe that's the reason why you
value doing homework because you just
don't want to be a bad student you want
to get the pat on the back if that's the
reason for you saying I need to spend my
time doing that that's not a good reason
right even if it's even more personal
than that like maybe it's because your
parents really want you to do the
homework but what's the consequence of
not doing it really in some situations
the homework is assessed so you've got
to think like what level does it assess
is it assessed like you did it or is the
quality of it also assessed in most
cases it's not examined that thoroughly
it's just like did you do the homework
kind of like yes or no so if you can do
it just to the point where it's like it
looks like it is done then that's
perfectly fine you could spend 15
minutes doing homework that would
normally take you two hours because you
know what for some people 15 minutes
work is actually still better quality
than some people are doing for two hours
in reality anyway so understanding what
is actually truly important based on the
consequence of failure and the other
criteria that I use to understand what
is worth focusing on is does this put me
in a better position tomorrow or next
week does it change my position does it
can I leverage this in some way so if I
invest one hour now does that save me
two hours next week if I invest 20
minutes right now does it save me 30
minutes you know later and then I can
have 10 extra minutes that I can
reinvest into that so I can compound
that just like compounding interest I
can invest my time in a way that means
that the future version of me has less
to deal with it makes it easier makes it
more efficient and that means that the
version of me next week is able to have
more free time to invest more
strategically which is why now I'm in a
position where I can spend for example
four hours on doing something and then
my total productivity
is maybe legitimately maybe 50 times
what it used to be five years ago not
because I am 50 times more efficient but
I've created processes systems assets
resources people structures teams in
place
to be able to do that a lot of people
will say I don't have a team I don't
have structures I don't have a system I
don't have processes that I can leverage
I don't rub my magic lamp and be like Oh
Genie I wish for processes and systems
that I can liberate I built that I built
that with my hand you know I invested my
time to building that and it took me
five to seven to ten years to get to the
point where I'm able to spend one hour
and get the productivity output that you
know it would have normally taken me you
know it's three whole months but it's a
continuous step-by-step process and the
thing that I always think about is that
that time will pass no matter what three
months will pass no matter what five
years ten years it's gonna pass no
matter what at that point once that time
has passed you either are in a better
position or you're in the same position
dealing with the same issues so I'm
always thinking about that so every day
I try to get at least one high priority
thing done if I get one high priority
thing done to a high quality and that
high priority thing puts me in a better
position then five weeks later I'm in a
better position and I'm still getting
stuff done and that stuff is Meaningful
and that stuff makes a difference
I actually had something to to kind of
add that or rather kind of bring up
which is that you know these
productivity tips I don't think that
these are necessarily stuff that you
know has never been put out there you
know I think that definitely elements
like Eisenhower's Matrix have you know
been in that productivity space for a
long time so why do you think so many
people haven't been necessarily taking
these strategies up in order to enrich
their lives I've seen a lot of YouTube
comments talking about how you know
Justin's not really saying anything new
um you know like this is stuff that um
you know you can find online easily so
you know like where's the actual you
know and it's not exactly you know
Reinventing the wheel but I guess like
you know the thing is is like if you
really need to reinvent the wheel if it
still works like these techniques and if
so why are people just not using them
yeah that's that's actually a very good
question I think well done Derek that's
a good question
um yeah so like first of all there's
very few people that are operating in
this kind of space between like the
theory and the practice like really
really extensively back and forth um you
know I've just I've been in Sydney here
now for just a couple days I met up with
some researchers academic researchers
these are the world leading researchers
in this space but a lot of these
world-leading researchers they don't
practice at all and they're aware of the
fact that they don't practice so they
need practitioners to bring in and
actually bridge that Gap today I
recently talked to a bunch of
practitioners and they don't have time
to deal with any of the theoretical
stuff for the research and things
there's no one that exists in between
that space in reality in society that
role is actually left vacant which is a
kind of odd actually it's meant to be
filled by researchers and practitioners
both but neither of them have time to
really fill it so anyway that's the
space that I like to operate and I like
to be very deep in the research and I
like to be very deep in the practice and
bring the two of them together I'm able
to do that because I run my own business
where that is the purpose of it I have
the ability to finance that and not like
not not Bridge the research practice
Camp while I'm homeless on the street
like telling people that are walking
past about how to bridge the research
practice get like I'm able to monetize
uh my ability to do this and therefore
um I have that kind of experience
something like the eyes are now Matrix I
think the reason is because the way the
Eisenhower Matrix is often taught is
sometimes removed from practical reality
like it's a little too ideal sometimes
and a lot of the complexity around
actually using something like the eyes
now matrix by the way if you don't know
what the eyes in that Matrix just look
it up go Google it's pretty simple to
understand but something like the
Eisenhower Matrix the the idea of like
deciding whether something is urgent or
important is not necessarily a simple
process like I just sort of talked about
in terms of how I dictate whether
something is important and worth
spending my time on something that's
urgent that's fairly straightforward but
something that is important that's a lot
more difficult to to pinpoint because of
this thing called cognitive bias
cognitive bias could mean that you form
a conclusion about something and say
something is important when an effect is
not and it's impossible to pick up on
that if you're not aware that this
cognitive violence exists and you have a
system around it so for me you know way
back when I first learned about
Eisenhower Matrix which was like
honestly like not that long ago I
learned about Eisenhower Matrix
embarrassingly late I learned about that
at life maybe six years ago I learned
about Eisenhower Matrix you know so it
was three four like four years into me
like teaching people about productivity
I discovered Eisenhower Matrix which
thinking back on it is like a little bit
embarrassing but uh when I first learned
it when I was first teaching it I didn't
think about the nuances of it I just did
assign it by urgency assign it by
important do your quadrants and then do
it and it's through practice realizing
that people really have difficulty
figuring out what really is important
and realizing that people were just
getting stuck in urgency they made me
realize okay so like there's something
clearly going on here and then by
evaluating who is able to use this
successfully and not you can figure out
where the trends and the patterns are so
I had another question so you talk about
like a low about price like prioritizing
and making sure you do at least like one
thing every single day at a minimum so I
guess some students might be interested
in how often you actually re-evaluate
your priorities like are you doing this
on a daily basis I think I've previously
heard you say in a webinar that you
actually do it multiple times a day
sometimes depending on how busy
um and how you know things change and
I've noticed in my life sometimes things
come up and my priorities have to change
and that does kind of mess up with your
schedule if you're not using you know
maybe more Advanced Techniques such as
like management and stuff well first
thing I'll talk about is the Richer
schedules just don't work I don't know
anyone that really goes sustainably with
rigid schedules like if I have a rigid
schedule I can use that for maybe two
three days but it just falls apart
eventually the idea is that like you
know it's inevitable that things will
happen because it's impossible to have a
life where everything is predicted and
anticipated and things don't happen so
creating a schedule that does not allow
room for that is fundamentally absurd
it's never going to work it's broken to
begin with I mean you could even say oh
I'm gonna allow room just in case
something happens every day but you
don't know what is going to happen like
maybe the thing that happens takes the
whole day takes maybe the whole week so
I'm not really a big fan of like
doubling down on like the time
management aspect of it or the
scheduling aspect of it for me I just
say like have simple basically pretty
like open sort of schedule my schedules
are very blank I do not schedule most
things in my day most of the things that
in my schedule are because other people
book in with me to have meetings or
consultations or whatever it is if I
didn't have people booking in to my
calendar my schedule would be like 99
would be just be blank unless there's
for example like a day where I want to
do three things rather than just the one
thing and then I would actually block
that out like okay in the morning for
these four hours I'll do this and then
I'll do like five hours of this kind of
General activity like just as a very
very vague Division and to be honest I
don't really even need that there's only
two things I can remember two things so
yeah that's the first thing is that if
you're rigidly scheduling that's kind of
like a fundamental issue but I can
understand why some people would rigidly
schedule because they need a little bit
of structure and that's okay but just
loosen that structure a little bit and
the second thing that it could be is
that there's insecurity or uncertainty
in terms of getting stuff done because
they might think well if I'm not
scheduling it in my day how am I going
to get it done the question is if you're
planning something in a schedule but
then that schedule isn't followed you
didn't get that stuff done anyway so it
says the insecurity is just being hidden
but it doesn't it doesn't change the
outcome you still didn't get it done
it's just that now you feel doubly bad
because not only did you not get it done
you also failed your schedule so instead
of having that priority it should be
placed on the tasks and getting that
high priority and so therefore going to
the original question Derek about how
often do I reevaluate my priority so
back when I was a house officer which is
a junior doctor in in New Zealand
Australia UK for those of you that don't
know when I was a house officer I
remember early on when I was working in
general surgery I was working in the
admissions unit so you get a lot of
patients coming through every single day
you know like 50 to 100 patients a day
just like coming in and you have to do
the admissions and scan them and send
them to theater or whatever it is you
know so it's a lot of work it's a high
turnover Department I remember my
consultant the US Vision is attending
physician went up to me and told me
Justin you got to keep your finger on
the pulse and the reason I said that is
because there was a blood test result
that had been sent through in the
morning the blood test was in the
morning and the result had come through
around 10 a.m and around 10 45 10 30. I
still hadn't checked it and so I didn't
know I didn't know for like that 30
minutes I had to come in because there's
no like notification that you get that
it's coming so it just relies on you
kind of checking it now if I was in
another department like geriatrics for
example working with older people if a
blood test comes in in the morning and
then it comes back at 10 but I don't
check it till 10 30 or even 1 pm doesn't
really matter because the pace is much
slower and I'm not you know it doesn't
matter whereas in surgery I had blood
test results might completely factor
into whether we book them into an
operation operating theater that
afternoon and if the test result is bad
we need to get them to do like a urine
sample or another test or something like
that straight away before lunch so we
can get the result after lunch so we can
still book them in you know later that
day or start them on a treatment before
the shift ends so the pace is very
different so I recommend for people
always when they're thinking about their
tasks they have the finger on your post
but your heart beat might be at a
different pace on different days so if
you know that things are changing for
you on a daily basis new tasks are
coming in things are changing and
developing on a daily basis your
priorities might be changing on a daily
basis you will need to reevaluate those
priorities every day or even multiple
times a day when I am on my busiest days
I'm re-prioritizing sometimes four or
five times a day on a normal day uh
where things are not at that speed I
might be prioritizing maybe once every
two or three days or you know maybe
every evening or something if I've got
something of a more regular routine
sometimes I have a certain priority for
the you know a whole Fortnight and I
know that this project is like the most
important thing unless something major
happens nothing is going to attract me
from that Focus so that will be my
priority again my situation is a little
bit different because the fact that I'm
not a student or an employee so I'm able
to control my time more
um but it's still the idea of what is
the pace through which things are
developing for you and adjusting your
prioritizing and re-prioritizing
dynamically basically and again coming
back to if your schedule is too rigid
that's going to be such a burden to not
only re-prioritize but then to like
reschedule multiple times a day it's
it's not really going to be sustainable
I think what you've said so far is very
interesting and um
my only thought is that so for people
who actually want to try this kind of I
guess new style of scheduling and pretty
much organizing their life right I can
imagine that some people feel very
uncomfortable going from like extremely
rigid to like basically free flow I
wouldn't recommend going from rigid to
free flow because this is probably just
not gonna work I don't think that's
gonna work so so I guess my question
would be like what would you recommend
people start to do to it's like
eventually go into that free flow state
of like organizational I think the first
thing is like mentally to understand
that scheduling it doesn't matter like
scheduling is not the thing that matters
getting things done is what matters and
recognizing that if you're failing your
schedule five out of seven days it's
already falling apart you you
essentially have nothing to lose to
begin with right the first thing I'd say
after that would be to start adding
buffer time
start overestimating the amount of time
that things will take and just gives you
a little bit more freedom what does that
mean it means that you'll probably have
to drop a few things from your day but
remember again you might be failing it
anyway so again there's nothing to lose
all you're doing is making it more
accurate instead of saying I'm going to
study for two hours here and then you
get to two hours and you realize I've
only finished like half of what I was
meant to do well look are you just gonna
stop but if you need to do it anyway you
have to do it so most people they'll
just keep going and they either drop
something else at the end of the day or
they like reschedule something or
whatever it is or they just stay up
later or just feel crap about it you
know so like whatever it is like it's
not accurate so just increase the amount
of time that you're blocking out for
things round everything up like way up
um I would never really be scheduling
anything in blocks that are less than
like 15 minutes of accuracy ever number
one even if it is accurate it's kind of
just not worth it and that's the thing
that you're blocking in is like answer
an email which you know is only going to
take you like four or five minutes you
know like you don't have to spend 15
minutes like answering anymore but first
of all I wouldn't even be putting that
on my calendar begin with you know
something as small as that yeah you have
like an admin block for 30 minutes and
do all of that stuff in batch you know
and that's kind of a separate technique
that that Eisenhower Matrix talks about
so really really round up the amount of
time things take and then after that
when you do that for a while you start
to realize first of all that you can
still be productive while not doing
quite as much per day and also the
additional freedom and time is actually
quite convenient and it gives you a
little bit more downtime and that time
can be reinvested so for example you
could do uh you could do some flashcards
during that time if you finish something
30 minutes early you're gonna you can do
30 minutes of Fast Cash during the time
you can re-prioritize you can re
reprioritize for the next day you can do
some self-reflection whatever it is you
know it's all good you can still feel
the time productively and actually with
things that probably make more of a
difference anyway once you are
comfortable with the idea that things
take longer than you expect and you're
not getting everything that you want to
get done every single day and you're
okay with that and you know how to
manage your your task list start
scheduling in blocks of focus
prioritization and start actually
dedicating time every evening or every
morning or whatever works the best for
the person to use something like an ice
now Matrix and figure out what are the
major priorities and start scheduling
those things in first and get used to
the idea of focusing on fewer high
priority items rather than lots of just
scattered or urgent items and once
you're at that stage and you're
comfortable with that you're really
ready to start moving on to some more
advanced strategies which I'm not going
to talk about here because they can it's
quite an extensive sort of topic but you
know this you know that opens the door
for a lot of things yeah I think they'll
definitely um I guess help people and
students feel a little bit more
comfortable with like starting to break
away like chisel away like the very
rigid structure they have in their
schedules I've seen schedules that like
I just packed from flights straight and
yeah I could it just feels so
unmanageable and I think with like rigid
schedules as well it actually can like
ironically cause procrastination because
you feel like you have to do it but then
you're like oh you're trying to force
yourself one thing that I found is like
if you know that you need to like just
chill out you know like I don't go from
like work to work to work to work to
work to work to work you know like I
spend a lot of time just like sitting
there like sometimes just doing nothing
literally just sitting there doing
absolutely nothing because like my brain
needs just a break you know or I'll you
know I'll be scrolling through Instagram
or watch something or whatever it is you
know if there are things that you tend
to procrastinate with because you kind
of need that think about even trying to
schedule that like have dedicated time
where you can do the stuff that like you
normally procrastinate with during the
day you have like an Instagram timer if
you want to you know we this this is
actually called a technique I can't
actually remember what this technique is
called but um if you know what it is
leave leave a comment in the in the
comments um but it's basically the idea
that you have like a distraction block
and you you know that like all the those
distractions you can just do it later so
like after dinner might be your
distraction block and so you say oh you
know I want to do this now I'll just do
that later because the idea is like
you're not getting rid of it you're not
saying I'm not going to do it but you're
you're procrastinating your
procrastination it's a small thing but
it can actually make a difference and I
know a lot of people that have been
quite successful using that technique

